# (Dataset Exploration Title: Prosper Loan Dataset)
## by (Fridah Arasa)


## Dataset

>  This financial dataset includes information about loans, borrowers, lenders, interest rates, and other relevant topics. A company called Prosper, also known as Prosper Marketplace Inc., is situated in San Francisco, California and specializes in giving customers loans with low interest rates. We are analyzing this dataset using data from Prosper and looking for patterns in the Prosper data.The 113,937 loans in this data set have an average of 81 variables, such as loan amount, borrower rate (or interest rate), current loan status, borrower income, borrower income range, total prosper loans borrowed by an individual, loan original amount, recommendations and investors. Basically this data set has information of clients and their characteristics which are the 81 variables. Attached is a link to the defination of its variables, https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1_1xH72OrKQWyxNdowMFMEpUNwEjRoYm5kXA0Ijv1vcc/edit#gid=0  


## Summary of Findings

> It's clear that individuals from other occupations are the most in terms of borrowing the loans, with a count of almost 28000. This is followed by professionals, computer programmers, executives, teachers, administrative assistants, analysts, nans, sales commission and accountants. These are the top ten occupations that have the highest number of borrowers. Students from technical school, judges, students from community college, college freshman, dentists, and students from college in their sophomore year were the occupations with the least number of borrowers. 
> The borrowers were comprised of different categories of employment status, and these categories are employed, those employed full-time, self-employed, not available to work, part-time employees, retired and others. The employed comprised a majority of the borrowers, followed by the those employed full-time and the least were those employed part-time, not employed and retired. 
> The list comprised borrowers who were in different stages of their loans. These stages entailed, those who are current loan borrowers, who had completed, chargedoff, defaulted, those whose loans were past due (1-15),(16-30),(31-60),(91-120), (>120) days, those in their final payments and those whose loans had been cancelled. 
> The highest number of borrowers had an income range of $ 25,000-49,999, followed by $50,000-74,999. Borrowers with an income range between $75,000-99,999 and $100,000+ had the same number of borrowers. An the least among the borrowers were those who are not employed and those whose income is $0.  
> It's clear that most borrowers were homeowners at the time. The percaentage number of homeowners was 50.4% and that of non-homeowners was 49.6%. 88.8% of borrowers had group memberships and 11.2% were not in any group at the time.
The relationship between the original loan amount and the loan term is positive. This means that as the original loan amount increases the loan term also does the same. There is a negative correlationship between the borrower rate and the orignal loan amount. This means that as the borrower rate increases, the original loan amount decreases. 
> The retired, part-time, not employed, other and those not available have the lowest original loan amount. The long tail among those with other status, full-time and employed suggest outliers with the highest original loan amount. 
> The employment status of all the borrowers had a loan term that ranges between 30 to 40. However, those with employed status had two term that is the one that falls between 30-40 and 60. Borrowers who are homeowners have the highest mean, and median in terms of the original loan amount compared to those who are not homeowners. 
> In the employement status variable, majority of the borrowers are those who are employed, followed by those who are employed full time, self-employed, those not available, other, part-time, not employed and the retired. Among the employed, and  full-time employed, majority of them are home owners. Majority of those who have part-time employment, self-employed, not employed, not available, and other are not home owners. The retired seem to have the same number of those who are homeowners and not homeowners. 
> Majority of the employed, those employed full time, self-employed, not employed, other and retired were not affliated to any group at the time of borrowing the loan. Majority of those who were not available for work were affliated to a group at the time of borrowing the loan. 
> There is a positive correlationship between the investors, investment from friends, term, loan original amount and monthly loan payment. However there is a negative correlationship between monthly loan payment, loan original amount, investment from friends amount and borrower rate.There is a strong correlationship between loan original amount and monthly loan payment of 0.93. This indicates that the loan original amount influences the monthly loan that will be repaid.
> The relationship between loan original amount and if the borrower is a homeowner or not, in relation to the terms of the loan, the longest term which has 60 months seems to have a larger effect compared to the other terms because it's median, first and third quartile are larger compared to those of the other terms. 
> The size encoding for the third numeric variable which is the number of investors, indicates  that its values are largest in the 'middle part' that is on the x-axis on the values ranging between 0.05 to 0.3 of the distribution of values, and smaller on the far left and right edges. This shows that majority of the investors invested where the borrower rate ranged between 0.05 to 0.3 and amount the friends invested ranging from 0-10,000. 
> The size encoding for the third numeric variable which is the number of investors, indicates  that its values are largest in the 'middle and lower part' of the distribution of values, and smaller on the upper edges. This shows that majority of the investors invested in the original loan amount that ranges from 5000 to 35000 and amount the friends invested ranging from 0-10,000.
## Key Insights for Presentation

> The relationship between the original loan amount and the loan term is positive. This means that as the original loan amount increases the loan term also does the same. 
> There is a negative correlationship between the borrower rate and the orignal loan amount. This means that as the borrower rate increases, the original loan amount decreases. The retired, part-time, not employed, other and those not available have the lowest original loan amount. 
> There is a strong correlationship between loan original amount and monthly loan payment of 0.93. This indicates that the loan original amount influences the monthly loan that will be repaid. 
> Homeownership influenced whether someone borrowed a loan or not. Majority of the borrowers were home owners with a 50.4% and those who were not homeowners summed up to 49.6%.